This is a brief for a ~45 minute presentation on the topic of introduction to computationale modelling in psychology/mental health. 
It should be aimed at audiecen who is scientifically capable (e.g. familiar with coding and statistics) but that has not really done any computational work. 
The ask is to draft the slides, demos and code and delivere them using quarto as a website, featuring r-shiny apps to demonstrate specific aspects. 
Below ++ indicates start of a new slide and /++ is the end of a slide
Colors for the same aspects should be unified, rewards are in crimson red, participant responses in navy blu, model predictions in turquoise
Create img folder where images can be placed. 

# Content
++ splash slide
Author Ondrej Zika
Date 5th May 2026
title: A brief introduction to computational modelling with hands on example in R 
where: Institute for Systems Neuroscience
/++

++
List objectives for te session
1) Introduce the idea of modelling, why is it helpful
2) Introduce the key components: model, free parameters, data
3) Specifying a model
4) Fitting a model
5) Comparing models
6) Quality controls - models are not magic
7) Further topics
/++

### Section 1: Introduction
++ background
What is computational modelling - describe how in psychology we often want to infer cognitive processess that are not directly observable and this is where models can help. 
/++ 

++ model comparison 
staying at comceptual level, shwo how we can use models to i) formalize hypotheses nad ii) compare them, 
use the analogy of a key which key fits the observed data the best 
/++

++
Give an example of a computational model familiar to the audience: rescorla wagner
/++

### Section 2: Key Components

++ 
overarching slide showing how data-model and free parameters relate
/++

++
Design data: what data does the task contain 
Participant data: what responses has the participant made? 
Data, what data am I fitting, at which level (single trial, participant, feature)
show (plot) example of a learning paradigm where people have to predict reward (range 0 to 100) that they will get on the next trial. the true reward fluctuates randomly. 
show true reward as dots in red, and participant predictions in navy blue   

/++

++
What is a model - mapping from data (input) to output (predictions)
/++

++
What are "free parameters" - here design a very simple shiny app for a rescorla wagner model on reward reversal (single cue, three reversals) paradigm which allows to vary the learning rate. embedd into quarto. 
/++

### Section 3: Specifying a model

++ 
show mathematical formulas for linear regression and rescorl wagner 
/++

++ 
show R code for rescorla wagner with one free parameter: alpha
/++

++
show math and R code for rescorla wagner with estiamted starting value (previous versions have v0 fixed at 0.5)
show r shiny app with the two free parasms
/++

++
show math and R code for rescorla wagner with estiamted starting value and separate learning rate parameters for better than expected and worse than expected (alpha_b, alpha_w)
show r shiny app with the three free params
/++


### Section 4: Fitting a model

++
show the data that we collected (syntehtic) 
use the same example as in section 2
make an r shiny app which shows the error for each trial between predicted and true reward as a bar plot at the bottom (for each trial). and on the right it shows overall error. 
use the RW model with single alpha, as the user moves the slider up and down the model predictions are updated and so are the errors. this introduces the idea of a cost function.  
participant data should be simulated using the basic model + some gaussian noise
/++ 

++
Describe different cost functions - error, mean squared error, likelihood
"a model is nothing without a cost function"
/++

++ maximum likelihood approach
In likelihood, inrtoduce it as probability that the data were generated by this model with this parameter values. P(D|M). 
Introduce log likelihood idea and r code how it can simply be computed for a single trial  
/++

++
show how log likelihood can be added across trials to get the overall log likelioood
and add the convention of looking at the negative log likelihood. 
update the shiny up by showing negative log likelihood on the side.
/++

++
for rw1 and rw1_initial_value, show how parameter values relate to likelihood values as a 1D / 2D plots
stress how important it is to understand likelihood functions for a specific data set
to demonstrate add a model which is rw1 but every time the prediction error is bigger than 20 it jumps to the extreme (100 if pe is positive and 0 if pe is negative) (i.e. there is an arbitrary threshold), plot the 1D alpha to likelihood plot
/++

++
show R code for the model (remove any mention of nCues, there is just one cue in our example)

```
rw1_basic <- function(data, params, conf=c()) {
  # rewards
  outcomes = data$outcomes
  trials = data$trials

  vals = matrix(, nrow = data$trial, ncol = data$nCues)
  vals[1,] = rep(0.5, 1, data$nCues)
  

  for (i in seq(data$trial)) {

    if (i != data$nTrials) {
      # pass all 
      vals[i+1,] = vals[i,]
      
      # update cue shown  value
      cue <- data$cue[i]
      vals[i+1,cue] = vals[i,cue] + params$alpha*(alpha[i,cue]  - vals[i,cue])
      
    }
    
  }
  out = list('vals'=vals)
}
```
show R code for a likelihood function (assuming gaussian likelihood), add documentation to the function below

```
gaussian_negloglik_fit <- function(x, data, conf = list()) {

  params <- conf$params
  for (i in seq_along(conf$params2estimate)) {
    params[[conf$params2estimate[i]]] <- x[i]
  }

  model_fun <- load_rating_model(
    model_name = conf$model_name,
    model_dir = conf$model_dir %||% file.path("models", "rating_models")
  )

  model_out <- model_fun(data = data, params = params, conf = conf)

  # model prediction given the parameters  
  mu <- clamp01(model_out$vals)

  # participant data 
  y  <- clamp01(data$rating)

  # assumption about likelihood SD
  obs_sd <- conf$obs_sd %||% 0.2


  nll <- -sum(stats::dnorm(y, mean = mu, sd = obs_sd, log = TRUE))
  nll
}
```

/++

++ 
Show R code for fitting in R (maybe one example with optim/nloptr)
give examples of the optimization algorithms, receommend trying more than 1 
/++


### Section 5: Comparing a model

++
models must be fitted to same data and given the same computational resources 
each model-parameter combination generates negative likelihood
but to compare models fairly we should take their flexibility into account, i..e we need to penalize the likelihood
/++

++ AIC/BIC
give overview of AIC and BIC logic 

/++

++ 
mention cross validation
/++

++
show R code which fits the three models above in a data set of 20 simulated participants 

### Section 6: Quality controls

++
    a) do my data allow for robust estimation?
    b) parameter recovery - show schematic workflow
    c) model recovery - show schematic workflow
/++

++
Refer to Wilson & Colling 2019 
Use their figure 1 to demonstrate workflow 
/++

++ 
add 11th rule - check for fitting algorithm
/++

### Section 7: Further/advanced topics

++
briefly introduce hierarchical estimation
/++

++
highlight the option to combine process model e.g. RW with GLM model
e.e.g fitting skin conductance responses. 
(i will paste my own example here)
/++

++
Further reading: Wilson & Collins - 10 rules for modelling
/++